add guidance for transitioning from a structural collection to a navigation collection (#551)
Microsoft/api-guidelines: graph/articles/collections.md

  "value": {
    "@odata.type": "#microsoft.graph.teamworkDevice",
    "id": "0f3ce432-e432-0f3c-32e4-3c0f32e43c0f",

>     "deviceType": "CollaborationBar",371

Reviewer: >371 [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=37&length=3)

Is this change intentional?

   "value": []
}
```

## 11. Collections of structural types (complex types or primitive types)

Collections of entity types are generally preferable to collections of structual types because collections of structural types must be updated as a single unit, meaning that they are overwritten entirely by new contents, rather than be updated relative to the existing contents. 
Sometimes, structural collection properties are added to a type and then scenarios are discovered later that require a collection of entity types.

> Take the following model with an entity type `foo` that has a collection of `bar`s:

Reviewer 2: These updates aim to address new issues in real-life modeling scenario. Can we use the actual Graph examples to inform our guidelines?

Author: Thanks, I found a suitable example from graph

```xml
<EntityType Name="foo">
  <Key>
    <PropertyRef Name="id" />
  </Key>
  <Property Name="id" Type="Edm.String" Nullable="false" />
  <Property Name="bars" Type="Collection(self.bar)" />
</EntityType>

<ComplexType Name="bar">
  <Property Name="prop1" Type="Edm.String" />
  <Property Name="prop2" Type="Edm.String" />
</ComplexType>
```
and a scenario arises that requires, for example, to remove individual `bar`s from the collection. 
There are two options forward: //// TODO do we want to offer both options, or just one?

### 11.1 Side-by-side collection properties

The model can be updated to have two collections side-by-side:
```diff
<EntityType Name="foo">
  <Key>
    <PropertyRef Name="id" />
  </Key>
  <Property Name="id" Type="Edm.String" Nullable="false" />

>   <Property Name="bars" Type="Collection(self.bar)" />

Reviewer: In this case, I would suggest deprecating `bars` in favor of `barsAsEntities`.

Author: I think the [other comment](https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/pull/551#discussion_r1669269517) has more context, but I'll leave this open for now pending that outcome.

> + <NavigationProperty Name="barsAsEntities" Type="Collection(self.barAsEntity)" ContainsTarget="true" />

Reviewer: We wouldn't really want them to name `barsAsEntities`, would we?  I feel like `Entities` isn't a concept the api consumer necessarily needs to understand.

Author: I'm open to other naming conventions, but I do think a naming convention needs to be established for this. If we take your other suggestions and drive workloads to deprecate the old property, then this new property is temporary and can be moved to use the old name if desired. I don't personally have an issue with this name because a client that is wanting to update this collection at least needs to know enough about OData to understand that this is the property that they need to use (instead of the old property). I'm normally opposed to hungarian notation, but in this instance, the difference between the two properties is *literally* the type, and so the naming needs to reflect that.

Reviewer: I think the versioning and deprecation doc says, if you can't find a better name, use _v2.  Should we use that for this example?

</EntityType>

<ComplexType Name="bar">
  <Property Name="prop1" Type="Edm.String" />
  <Property Name="prop2" Type="Edm.String" />
</ComplexType>

+<EntityType Name="barAsEntity">
+ <Key>
+   <PropertyRef Name="prop1" />
+ </Key>
+ <Property Name="prop1" Type="Edm.String" />
+ <Property Name="prop2" Type="Edm.String" />
+</EntityType>
```
Clients will now be able to refer to individual `bar`s using `prop1` as a key, and they can now remove those `bar`s using `DELETE` requests:
```http

> DELETE /foos/{fooId}/bars/{some_prop1}

Reviewer: This should be `barsAsEntities`, right?
``` suggestion
DELETE /foos/{fooId}/barsAsEntities
```

```
```http
HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
```
The expectation is that `bars` and `barsAsEntities` are treated as two "views" into the same data.

> To meet this expectation, workloads must:

Reviewer 2: I didn't understand why we would enforce ambiguity of updating two places indefinitely?  I think that we need to deprecate wrong modeling choice and have a single option to treat so called 'bars'.

Author: I'm happy to add a sentence that the old property should be marked deprecated. I do think these expectations need to be honored at least while both properties exist side-by-side. I personally don't think we need to drive workloads to actually remove the property, their own supportability overhead should handle that if necessary.

Do you agree that these expectations need to be met while we have both properties? If so, does it work for you if I just add a sentence to mark the old property as deprecated?

Reviewer: I agree these semantics need to hold while both properties are supported, and that we should add a sentence that the old property should be deprecated.

> 1. Keep the properties consistent between `bar` and `barAsEntity`.

Reviewer: Do we really want to keep maintaining `bar`, or would it be better to deprecate `bar` and only add new properties to `barAsEntity`?

Author: At the very least, this section needs to be honored by workloads for the period that both properties exist. I think we are agreed on that?

I personally don't feel strongly about driving workloads to deprecate the old property. I think that their own supportability overhead will be a forcing function for them, and if they don't have significant overhead, I don't see a problem with having both properties. 

Maybe I should just add a sentence that says that the old property should be marked deprecated (and leave out whether it ever gets removed)?

Reviewer: Agree that these semantics need to hold for the duration during which both versions of the property are supported. I think this is called out in the deprecation spec as well.  Happy to leave this here, and add that the old property should be marked as deprecated.

Author: Sounds good, the old property got marked deprecated in a previous iteration, so I'm resolving this comment

Any changes to one type must be reflected in the other type.
2. Reject requests that update both collections at the same time.
A request that adds an item to `barsAsEntities` while replacing the content of `bars` must rejected with a `400`, for example:
```http
PATCH /foos/{fooId}
{
  "bars": [
    {
      "prop1": "some value",
      "prop2": "another value"
    }
  ],
  "barsAsEntities@delta": [
    {
      "prop1": "a key value",
      "prop2": "some new value"
    }
  ]
}
```
```http
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
{
  "error": {
    "code": "badRequest",
    "message": "'bars' and 'barsAsEntities' cannot be updated in the same request.",
}
```

TODO should this be a 409 conflict instead?
TODO implement this in WebApi

### 11.2 `$select` overloading

The model can be updated to simply switch the complex type for an entity type:
```diff
<EntityType Name="foo">
  <Key>
    <PropertyRef Name="id" />
  </Key>
  <Property Name="id" Type="Edm.String" Nullable="false" />
- <Property Name="bars" Type="Collection(self.bar)" />

> + <NavigationProperty Name="bars" Type="Collection(self.bar)" ContainsTarget="true" />

Author: how does sdp look for workloads on this?

- <ComplexType Name="bar">
+ <EntityType Name="bar">
+ <Key>
+   <PropertyRef Name="prop1" />
+ </Key>
  <Property Name="prop1" Type="Edm.String" />
  <Property Name="prop2" Type="Edm.String" />
-</ComplexType>
+</EntityType>
```
To maintain backwards compatibility **and** compliance with the OData standard, there are several semantic changes that the workload must address:
1. Existing clients would have been able to `$select` the `bars` property.
Now that `bars` is a navigation property, the [OData standard](https://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/odata-v4.01-part2-url-conventions.html#_Toc31361040) specifies that its navigation link be returned when it is `$selected`:

> If the select item is a navigation property, then the corresponding navigation link is represented in the response.

Because the previous behavior for `$select=bars` was to include the collection in the response, and because the standard dictates that the navigation link be included in the response, the new behavior is to include both:

```http
GET /foos/{fooId}?$select=bars
```
```http
200 OK
{
  "id": "{fooId}",
  "bars": [
    {
      "prop1": "some value",
      "prop2": "another value"
    },
    ...

>   ]

Author: ```suggestion
  ],
```

  "bars@odata.navigationLink": "/foos('{fooId}')/bars"
}
```

2. The default behavior for structural collections is to include them in the response payload for their containing entity. If this was the behavior of `foo` before, it must be preserved by **auto-expanding** the `bars` property now that it is a navigation property (because the default behavior for navigation properties is to **not** expand them).

> 3. Structural collections are updated using `PATCH` requests to replace the entire contents of the collection. The new navigation property must preserve this behavior.

Reviewer: to be clear, the patch request is to the containing entity (not the collection), and this is required only if the original structural property supported updating.
```suggestion
3. Structural collections can be updated using a `PATCH` request to the containing entity to replace the entire contents of the collection. If the service supported such updates to the structural collection, then updates to the new navigation property must preserve this behavior.
```

Author: I'm concerned about adding too many intervening clauses and conditionals. Workload teams need to be able to understand what is expected of them in a straightforward manner. 

I don't think anything in my original statements is factually incorrect. I would love to correct anything that's wrong, but we need to do so in a way that doesn't make this sound "optional".

   "value": []
}
```

> ## 11. Collections of structural types (complex types or primitive types)

Reviewer: the second option (changing the property to a nav prop) doesn't really work for collections of primitive types, right?

> Collections of entity types are generally preferable to collections of structual types because collections of structural types must be updated as a single unit, meaning that they are overwritten entirely by new contents, rather than be updated relative to the existing contents. 

Reviewer: this is one of the reasons entities are favorable over complex types within a collection, but limiting to just this case often gets us in trouble.  i.e., a workload may say "this is read-only", or "I'm okay with them replacing the whole collection", and then get into trouble later, either because they do need to update an individual member (or something nested within an individual member), or because they need to refer to an individual member for some other reason (i.e., an auditLog or recommendation might want to reference an individual key credential). Also, it's harder to page collections of complex types.

So, for a variety of reasons, the strong recommendation is to use entity types in collections.

> Collections of entity types are generally preferable to collections of structual types because collections of structural types must be updated as a single unit, meaning that they are overwritten entirely by new contents, rather than be updated relative to the existing contents. 

Reviewer: This is one of the reasons entities are favorable over complex types within a collection, but limiting to just this case often gets us in trouble. i.e., a workload may say "this is read-only", or "I'm okay with them replacing the whole collection", and then get into trouble later, either because they do need to update an individual member (or something nested within an individual member), or because they need to refer to an individual member for some other reason (i.e., an auditLog or recommendation might want to reference an individual key credential). Also, it's harder to page collections of complex types.

So, for a variety of reasons, the strong recommendation is to use entity types in collections.

```suggestion
Entity types are generally preferred for collections since complex types within a collection cannot be individually referenced. Collections of complex types, including any nested properties, must be updated as a single unit, entirely replacing the existing contents. Even if your API is read-only today, modeling it as a collection of entities gives you more flexibility in referencing individual members now and in the future. 
```

Sometimes, structural collection properties are added to a type and then scenarios are discovered later that require a collection of entity types.
Take the following model with an entity type `application` that has a collection of `keyCredential`s:

```xml
<EntityType Name="application">
  <Key>
    <PropertyRef Name="id" />
  </Key>
  <Property Name="id" Type="Edm.String" Nullable="false" />
  <Property Name="keyCredentials" Type="Collection(self.keyCredential)" />
  ...
</EntityType>

<ComplexType Name="keyCredential">
  <Property Name="keyId" Type="Edm.Guid" />
  <Property Name="endDateTime" Type="Edm.DateTimeOffset" />
  ...
</ComplexType>
```
and a scenario arises that requires, for example, to remove individual `keyCredential`s from the collection. 

> There are two options forward: //// TODO do we want to offer both options, or just one?

Reviewer: I think it's okay to offer both options, although I think the second option has strong advantages over the first.

```
```http
HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
```
The expectation is that `keyCredentials` and `keyCredentialsAsEntities` are treated as two "views" into the same data.
To meet this expectation, workloads must:
1. Keep the properties consistent between `keyCredential` and `keyCredentialAsEntity`.
Any changes to one type must be reflected in the other type.
2. Reject requests that update both collections at the same time.
A request that adds an item to `keyCredentialsAsEntities` while replacing the content of `keyCredentials` must rejected with a `400`, for example:
```http
PATCH /applications/{applicationId}
{
  "keyCredentials": [
    {
      "keyId": "10000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000",
      "endDateTime": "2012-12-03T07:16:23Z"
    }
  ],
  "keyCredentialsAsEntities@delta": [
    {
      "keyId": "20000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000",
      "endDateTime": "2012-12-03T07:16:23Z"
    }
  ]
}
```
```http
HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
{
  "error": {
    "code": "badRequest",
    "message": "'keyCredentials' and 'keyCredentialsAsEntities' cannot be updated in the same request.",
}
```

TODO should this be a 409 conflict instead?
TODO implement this in WebApi

> ### 11.2 `$select` overloading

Reviewer: I'm not sure that calling it "$select overloading" conveys the intent of this option -- i.e., if I was thinking about different ways to evolve the collection, I wouldn't look for an option called "Select overloading". That is more of a by-product than an option. The option is to replace the complex type with an entity type -- in order for this to work, however, existing select semantics need to be maintained.

```suggestion
### 11.2 Redefine as Entity Type
```
